# predictable-fluctuations-in-synaptic-efficacy
 
The manuscript is available at: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.04.14.488362v2.

The demo data is the spike trains of two neurons (#763 and #557) in dataset #715093703 from Allen Institute MindScope Program (2019). Allen Brain Observatory -- Neuropixels Visual Coding [dataset]. Available from https://brain-map.org/explore/circuits.

Many controlled, in vitro studies have demonstrated how postsynaptic responses to presynaptic spikes are not constant but depend on short-term synaptic plasticity (STP) and the detailed timing of presynaptic spikes. However, the effects of short-term plasticity (depression and facilitation) are not limited to short, sub-second timescales. The effects of STP appear on long timescales as changes in presynaptic firing rates lead to changes in steady-state synaptic transmission. Here we examine the relationship between natural variations in the presynaptic firing rates and spike transmission in vivo. Using large-scale spike recordings in awake mice from the Allen Institute Neuropixels dataset, we first detect putative excitatory synaptic connections based on cross-correlations between the spike trains of millions of pairs of neurons. For the subset of pairs where a transient, excitatory effect was detected, we use a model-based approach to track fluctuations in synaptic efficacy and find that efficacy varies substantially on slow (~1 minute) timescales over the course of these recordings. For many connections, the efficacy fluctuations are correlated with fluctuations in the presynaptic firing rate. To understand the potential mechanisms underlying this relationship, we then model the detailed probability of postsynaptic spiking on a millisecond timescale, including both slow changes in postsynaptic excitability and monosynaptic inputs with short-term plasticity. The detailed model reproduces the slow efficacy fluctuations observed with many putative excitatory connections, suggesting that these fluctuations can be both directly predicted based on the time-varying presynaptic firing rate and, at least partly, explained by the cumulative effects of STP.
